.\" man page for UniversalCodeGrep.
.\"
.\" Copyright 2016 Gary R. Van Sickle (grvs@users.sourceforge.net).
.\"
.\" This file is part of UniversalCodeGrep.
.\"
.\" UniversalCodeGrep is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the
.\" terms of version 3 of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" Software Foundation.
.\"
.\" UniversalCodeGrep is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
.\" WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A
.\" PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
.\" UniversalCodeGrep.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" troff macro logic to backfill if we don't have .URL
.de URL
\\$2 \(laURL: \\$1 \(ra\\$3
..
.if \n[.g] .mso www.tmac
.\"
.\" Start of the actual man page text.
.\"
.TH UCG 1 2016-10-31
.SH NAME
ucg \- a grep-like tool for searching source code
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ucg
[
.I OPTIONS
]
.I PATTERN
[
.I FILES OR DIRECTORIES
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ucg
(UniversalCodeGrep) is an extremely fast grep-like
tool specialized for searching large bodies of source code.
It is intended to be largely command-line compatible with ack,
to some extent with ag, and - where appropriate - with
.BR grep (1).
Search patterns are specified as
.BR pcre (3)
regular expressions.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Searching:
.TP
.B \-\-[no]smart\-case
Ignore case if
.I PATTERN
is all lowercase (default: enabled).
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-ignore\-case
Ignore case distinctions in
.I PATTERN
.TP
.B \-Q, \-\-literal
Treat all characters in
.I PATTERN
as literal.
.TP
.B \-w, \-\-word\-regexp
\fIPATTERN\fR must match a complete word.
.SS Search Output:
.TP
.B \-\-column
Print column of first match after line number.
.TP
.B \-\-nocolumn
Don't print column of first match (default).
.SS "File presentation:"
.TP
.B \-\-color, \-\-colour
Render the output with ANSI color codes.
.TP
.B \-\-nocolor, \-\-nocolour
Render the output without ANSI color codes.
.SS "File/directory inclusion/exclusion:"
.TP
\fB\-\-[no]ignore\-dir\fR=\fINAME\fR, \fB\-\-[no]ignore\-directory=\fINAME\fR
[Do not] exclude directories with \fINAME\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-exclude=\fIGLOB\fR, \fB\-\-ignore=\fIGLOB\fR
Files matching \fIGLOB\fR will be ignored.
.TP
.B \-\-ignore\-file=\fIFILTER\fB:\fIFILTERARGS\fR
Files matching \fIFILTER\fR:\fIFILTERARGS\fR
(e.g. ext:txt,cpp) will be ignored.
.TP
.B \-\-include=\fIGLOB\fR
Only files matching \fIGLOB\fR will be searched.
.TP
.B \-k, \-\-known\-types
Only search in files of recognized types (default: on).
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-no\-recurse
Do not recurse into subdirectories.
.TP
.B \-r, \-R , \-\-recurse
Recurse into subdirectories (default: on).
.TP
.B \-\-type=\fI[no]TYPE\fR
Include only [exclude all] TYPE files.
Types may also be specified as \fI\-\-[no]TYPE\fR.
.SS File type specifications:
.TP
.B \-\-type\-add=\fITYPE\fB:\fIFILTER\fB:\fIFILTERARGS\fR
Files \fIFILTER\fRed with the given \fIFILTERARGS\fR are treated as
belonging to type \fITYPE\fR. Any existing definition of type
\fITYPE\fR is appended to.
.TP
.B \-\-type\-del=\fITYPE\fR
Remove any existing definition of type \fITYPE\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-type\-set=\fITYPE\fB:\fIFILTER\fB:\fIFILTERARGS\fR
Files \fIFILTER\fRed with the given \fIFILTERARGS\fR are treated as
belonging to type \fITYPE\fR. Any existing definition of type
\fITYPE\fR is replaced.
.SS Performance tuning:
.TP
.B \-\-dirjobs=\fINUM_JOBS\fR
Number of directory traversal jobs (std::thread<>s)
to use.
.TP
.B \-j, \-\-jobs=\fINUM_JOBS\fR
Number of scanner jobs (std::thread<>s) to use.
.SS Miscellaneous:
.TP
.B \-\-noenv
Ignore
.B .ucgrc
configuration files.
.SS Informational options:
.TP
.B \-?, \-\-help
Print a list of options.
.TP
.B \-\-help\-types, \-\-list\-file\-types
Print a list of supported file types.
.TP
.B \-\-usage
Print a brief usage message.
.TP
.B \-V, \-\-version
Print program version.
.PP
Mandatory or optional arguments to long options are also
mandatory or optional for any corresponding short options.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Exit status is 0 if any matches were found, 1 if no matches,
2 or greater on error.
.SH FILES
.B ucg
supports configuration files with the name
.B .ucgrc
in which command-line options can be stored on a per-user
and per-directory-hierarchy basis.
.SS Format:
.B .ucgrc
files are text files with a simple format. Each line of text
can be either:
.IP * 4
A single-line comment. The line must start with a # and the
comment continues for the rest of the line.
.IP * 4
A command-line parameter. This must be exactly as if it was
given on the command line.
.SS Location and Read Order:
When
.B ucg
is invoked, it looks for command-line options from
the following locations in the following order:
.TP 4
1.
The
.B .ucgrc
file in the user's $HOME directory, if any.
.TP 4
2.
The first
.B .ucgrc
file found, if any, by walking up the component directories
of the current working directory. This traversal stops at either
the user's $HOME directory or the root directory. This is the
project config file, and is intended to live in the top-level
directory of a project directory hierarchy.
.TP 4
3.
The command line itself.
.PP
Options read later will override earlier options.
.SS Creating User-Defined File Types:
.B ucg
supports the creation of user-defined file types with the following options:
.HP 4
\fB\-\-type\-set=\fITYPE\fB:\fIFILTER\fB:\fIFILTERARGS\fR
.HP 4
\fB\-\-type\-add=\fITYPE\fB:\fIFILTER\fB:\fIFILTERARGS\fR
.PP
Any number of type filters, in any combination, can be added to a single
file \fITYPE\fR.
.PP
Three types of \fIFILTER\fRs are currently supported:
.TP 4
*
\fBext\fR (extension list)
.TP 4
*
\fBis\fR (literal filename)
.TP 4
*
\fBglob\fR (glob pattern)
.RS 4
.SS Extension List Filter
.PP
The extension list filter allows you to specify a comma-separated
list of file extensions which are to be considered as belonging to
file type \fITYPE\fR.  For example:
.PP
.nf
.RS
\fBucg\fR \-\-type\-set=type1:ext:abc,xqz,def --type1 'Pattern'
.RE
.fi
.PP
will search all files with extensions *.abc, *.xqz, and *.def in the directory
tree rooted at the current working directory for the literal string 'Pattern'.
.RE
.RS 4
.SS Literal Filename Filter
.PP
The literal filename filter simply specifies a single literal
filename which is to be considered as belonging to file type \fITYPE\fR.
.PP
Example:
.nf
.RS
\fBucg\fR \-\-type\-add=autoconf:is:configure.ac --autoconf 'Pattern'
.RE
.fi
.PP
This will search only files named exactly 'configure.ac' for the literal
string 'Pattern'.
.RE
.RS 4
.SS Glob filter
.PP
The glob filter allows you to specify a glob pattern to match
against filenames. If the glob matches, the file is considered
as belonging to the file type \fITYPE\fR.
.PP
Example:
.nf
.RS
\fBucg\fR \-\-type\-set=mk:glob:?akefile* --mk 'Pattern'
.RE
.fi
.PP
This will search only files which match the shell glob pattern '?akefile*'
(e.g. Makefile, makefile, Bakefile.bkl, etc.) for the literal string 'Pattern'
.RE
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to
.URL https://github.com/gvansickle/ucg/issues
.SH AUTHOR
.B ucg
is written by
.URL grvs@users.sourceforge.net "Gary R. Van Sickle" .
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
The official
.URL https://github.com/gvansickle/ucg "UniversalCodeGrep site"
on GitHub.
.PP
.BR grep (1)
.BR pcre (3)
.BR pcre2 (3)
